Welcome to JW Broadcasting for November 2024.
On September 14, 2024, the 156th Class of Gilead graduated.
This is the culmination of five months of intensive study
and spiritual refinement.
What kind words of encouragement lie in store in this graduation?
As we watch this portion of the program,
look for something that you can apply in your life.
For our introductory chairman comments,
we thought we talked for just a couple of moments
about what a privilege it is to be used by Jehovah.
And when we were kids, sometimes we played games on the school yard, didn't we?
And maybe if it was a team sport, sometimes there would be two captains selected,
and then the captains would choose from among the kids playing the game,
you know, who was going to be on their team.
And what would happen?
They would pick the best players first, the most skilled, the most talented,
and our goal was just not to be picked last.
But that's okay.
But the point of the illustration is that each captain had in his mind
what he valued among those potential players,
and then that guided his choices.
Well, Jehovah has a work to do,
and he uses us humans to do an important part of it.
But who will Jehovah choose to use in his service?
What does he value?
What kind of people is Jehovah pleased to use to do his work?
Well, on that point, let me make one clarification, little context.
When we talk about, in these comments, being used by Jehovah,
we're not specifically talking about privileges.
Because privileges come and go, and very often it's timing and availability
and need to play a big part.
But rather, we're talking about being the kind of people
who cultivate the spiritual qualities that Jehovah values,
and then therefore are useful to him in whatever assignment
or work he has to do at a given time.
Well, on that point, this summer, most of us enjoyed watching the good news
according to Jesus episode one.
And the events captured in that episode highlight for us,
in a special way, what Jehovah values in humans,
and so therefore, who he is pleased to use.
For example, who would Jehovah use to be the earthly mother
of his only begotten son?
Would it be someone maybe from a prominent family,
maybe from a respected in the community?
Maybe someone wealthy, so that his son would be sure to be cared for.
Maybe someone from the capital city in Jerusalem.
Well, that might be okay, but what does the Bible say?
Turn with me, please, to the Book of Luke, chapter 1.
And let's read together, Luke 1, 26, and 27.
In her sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God
to a city of Galilee named Nazareth.
To a virgin, promised in marriage to a man named Joseph of David's house,
and the name of the virgin was Mary.
And we remember from this summer's video,
this is who Jehovah chose Mary, a humble, young woman,
of little means materially from an insignificant city called Nazareth.
But why? Why did Jehovah choose Mary?
What mattered most, and what did he see in Mary that assured him
she was the right choice?
Well, in Mary, Jehovah saw a deeply spiritual, humble, obedient, young woman.
And as we get to know Mary in the Bible account,
it becomes very clear why Jehovah chose her for this important assignment.
For example, as soon as she understood from the angel Gabriel what the assignment was
that Jehovah had in mind for her, this assignment that would require a miracle,
this assignment that would change her life forever, what was her reaction?
Verse 38, then Mary said,
look, Jehovah's slave girl,
may it happen to me according to your declaration?
And there she is, we remember that moment in the video, humble obedience
and submission to Jehovah's will.
Did Mary have questions undoubtedly?
But she didn't need to know all the answers to those questions.
All she needed was that the request was coming from Jehovah,
and so the answer was yes.
Humble, obedience, and submission to Jehovah's will.
Now, we further see what Jehovah saw in Mary.
When we hear her words that she spoke in Luke 146 through 55,
we won't read that, but we remember this little speech that she gave there,
and here's the moment from the video.
These two women with very unique circumstances
as they're reflecting on what Jehovah was doing in their case.
And Mary, as we know, in this few verses,
makes copious references to passages in the Hebrew scriptures.
And she shows herself to be one who loved God's Word,
who treasured it, who read it, studied it, meditated on it.
And in her situation, reading God's Word, she felt a connection to Hannah,
and she felt a connection to the Psalmist.
These are the things that motivated and formed her words.
So Jehovah used humble, spiritual, obedient Mary
to be the earthly mother of his son.
Well, another example.
When the time came to announce the birth of his son,
who did Jehovah choose to tell?
Would it be the prominent officials in Bethlehem?
Would it be the leaders of the Sanhedrin?
Maybe the high priest? Maybe Herod?
Well, what does the Bible say?
Turn over to Luke chapter 2 and verses 8 and 9.
Luke 2.8, there were also in the same region,
shepherds, living out of doors,
and keeping watch in the night over their flocks.
Suddenly, Jehovah's angels stood before them,
and Jehovah's glory gleamed around them,
and they became very fearful.
And what was the announcement, verse 11,
for today there was born to you in David's city, a Savior,
who is Christ, the Lord.
This Jehovah appeared to these humble shepherds,
men who would treasure this privilege
to see the infant God's son,
men whose reaction would reassure Joseph and Mary
about how special this child was,
and of course would bring praise and glory to Jehovah's name.
Well, soon the time came for Mary and Joseph
to go to the temple for the purification offering,
and so who would Jehovah use to welcome his son,
and even to acknowledge Jesus' future role as the Messiah?
Well, perhaps Mary thought that the officiating priests
might make some comment about what Jesus' future role would be,
but who did Jehovah choose to do this?
The faithful man, the simian.
Simian had been faithful to Jehovah his whole life,
and Jehovah appreciated and loved him for his faithful course,
and had promised Simian that he would have this privilege
to see the Christ before he died.
And finally, who would Jehovah use
to further emphasize the importance of this infant child,
and to proclaim it to all those in the temple area?
Faithful Anna, who was always present,
never missing from the temple,
she was steadfast in her theocratic routine
and in her appreciation for pure worship.
Jehovah could count on her to be present that day
when Joseph and Mary would arrive with Jesus Christ.
Well, thinking about those who Jehovah use
to carry out his will in these various ways,
in connection with his son,
and thinking about what a privilege it is
to be used for anything in Jehovah's service,
leads us to ask the question,
well, how can I be the kind of person
that Jehovah would be pleased to use?
Well, as these examples teach us,
it's by focusing on what matters most to Jehovah.
And what is it?
Is it prominence?
Is it fame?
Is it wealth?
Is it personality?
No, it's spirituality, isn't it?
And so we become useful to Jehovah
when we cultivate these beautiful spiritual qualities
that Jehovah appreciates,
and many of them, the same ones that Mary
and the Shepherds and Simian Anna showed,
such as deep spirituality, humility, and obedience,
like Mary, appreciation for spiritual things
like those humble Shepherds,
the faithful waiting attitude like Simian,
and constancy in your theocratic routine like Anna.
Jehovah sees such sincere efforts
and beautiful spiritual qualities
and he values them.
It is qualities that matter to Jehovah.
It is substance that matters to Jehovah.
Not what appears to the eyes,
but what is in the heart.
So as you go to your assignments now,
remember these fine examples,
men and women who pleased Jehovah,
not because they were impressive by the world standards,
but because they developed qualities
that Jehovah appreciated
and a life course of humble loyal service to him.
These are ones that Jehovah appreciated,
ones that Jehovah could use to do his will,
and always treasure the privilege
of being used by Jehovah.
And we know that the rest of the program
will help us to be the kind of people
that Jehovah loves, approves of,
and is pleased to use in his service.
The next part of the program is the inside story,
and the operative word is story.
Isn't it?
Because each one of Jehovah's servants has a story,
has a journey with Jehovah,
and we always enjoy hearing about some of the stories
of our Gilead students.
So in this episode of the Inside Story,
we will have interviews spanning four different countries
and also a brief tour of a notable Bible land.
So please enjoy the Inside Story.
Welcome to this edition of the Inside Story.
Today, we will get to know six
of the 48 students representing the 156th Class of Gilead.
To my left, I have Sister Hanta Razaf Mandimbi
from Madagascar.
Next to Hanta is Adalia and Manny Luna
from the United States.
To my far right is Simon and Yoshi Hori from Japan.
And last but not least,
we have Brother Marco Caproni from Italy.
Welcome to all six of you,
and we look forward to hearing
what you have to share with us today.
Why don't we start
by first hearing how long you've been
in your respective Bethels
and what your current assignments are?
Why don't we start with you, Hanta?
I've been serving at Madagascar Bethel for 24 years.
Nice.
And currently I'm serving in one of the translation teams there.
Excellent. Adalia.
We are currently serving in the United States branch,
Wachill Complex for about 13 years.
And my assignment is actually a split assignment
between food service and health care department.
Okay, very good.
Manny.
And I, along with Adalia,
have been serving at the United States branch
for about 13 years,
and I currently work with the service department.
Very good.
Let's switch over to you, Simon, please.
I have been in the Japan branch for 16 years,
and my assignment is the computer department.
Okay, well good.
And Yoshi?
And I've been in the Japan branch for six years,
and now I serve in the legal department.
Okay, very good.
And please, Marco.
I've been serving an Italy branch in Rome for 18 years,
and actually I'm serving in the public information department.
Excellent.
Well now that we've got a chance to learn a little bit about you,
let's start off with Simon.
Simon, I understand that you were baptized at 10 years of age.
Yeah.
Can you tell us about what your father did
to help you make spiritual progress at such a young age?
Well, my father was very creative.
Explain.
For example, as a family,
we enjoyed playing a game,
named Bible Golf.
Okay.
It's a simple game.
So the winner is whoever can open to a specific Bible verse
in the fewest attempt.
So if I can open the verse in the first attempt,
it's a hole in one.
All right.
And three attempts, it's a birdie.
Something like this.
And another game I can still remember is Jehovah's Witnesses
Game of Life,
which is a bold game with two circles on it,
and you can start from outside circle,
which represents non-witness life.
Non-witness life.
Okay.
And if you progress properly,
Bible study,
and dedication, assembly,
or convention, then you can enter into inner circle,
which represents witness life.
But there is a time limit called Armageddon.
So when the alarm goes off,
you can enter into paradise if you are in the inner circle.
And it's so much fun,
because there are also something blocks along the way.
And your father came up with this game.
Yes.
Well, obviously he was very creative.
Did he do anything else to help you?
Well, the knowledge book came out.
He asked me and my sister if we wanted to get baptized
within six months.
And we said yes.
From then on, each morning,
he would leave the house,
knock on the door,
introduce himself as brother Hori,
and conducted Bible study with us.
And we have to serve tea for him.
Now I understand he wanted to teach us
the Bible study is a serious thing in our life.
It's unique,
but I was able to get baptized within a year.
Well, obviously it worked,
because you are with us today.
Well, once you were baptized,
was it always smooth sailing for you Simon?
Honestly, no, not always.
As I grew older,
I started struggling,
and I wanted to be exemplarily in congregation,
but I liked computer very much.
So I wanted to be an engineer in an IT company.
Big dreams, huh?
Yeah, okay.
But eventually,
the Timothy drama came out.
And in that drama,
the boss of Paul encouraged Timothy
not to use his skill
in Seidron's world,
but for Jehovah.
That was the turning point for me.
Instead of pursuing secular work,
I started pioneering,
and then I came to love it.
Oh, wise choice.
Let's talk to your wife Yoshi for just a moment.
Now Yoshi, you were born in Japan,
but I understand that you and your family moved around a bit.
Can you tell us a little bit about that?
Yes, so my father,
he wasn't a witness at the time,
and his work necessitated them.
You move around quite a bit.
So I remember I was five
when we were living in Osaka, in Japan.
Then we moved to London in Britain.
We were there for four years.
And then after that, we all moved to Scotland.
So I lived in Glasgow for five years.
After that, we all moved back to Tokyo.
And later, when I was an adult,
I moved on my own to serve
where the need was great in Tanzania.
I stayed there for six years.
And after that, I moved back and now we're here.
And we're happy to have you.
Now you've got to live in some pretty fascinating places
over those years.
What did you learn about yourself and culture
from living in those places?
Well, you know, when I was young,
I honestly didn't really appreciate it.
But now that I've grown older,
I feel that it's taught me to understand
that there's so many different ways of looking at something
in so many different ways of doing something.
But actually, all of them are really, really good.
And it's a blessing to have so many different personalities
with us.
And I just love working with these variety of brothers
and sisters now.
Oh, obviously looking back on it,
you learned quite a bit.
Thank you for sharing that.
Let's switch over to you now, Hanta.
I understand that you were not raised
as one of Jehovah's Witnesses.
Can you tell us a little bit about your background, please?
I was raised in a religious family.
We used to go to a Protestant church every week.
And my siblings and I even attended Sunday school for a while.
Okay.
Now, although your father never became one of Jehovah's Witnesses,
how was he instrumental in leading you to the truth?
My father welcomed anyone who knocked
at our door in the name of religion.
And Jehovah's Witnesses were among these people.
Every time they stopped by,
they would leave magazines, books, brochures.
What I really appreciate in those publications
is God's promise of a paradise Earth.
I really liked the pictures of paradise
in those publications.
So much so that my siblings and I would trace those pictures,
paint it down and hang them on the wall.
Your parents were okay with you redecorating like this?
One day, our father bought the leaf forever book
from the Witnesses.
It was then that the Bible study was started.
From the first meeting I attended,
I was so impressed by the warm welcome I received
that I said to myself,
I want to belong to these people.
Eventually, all my siblings and I,
along with our mother, embraced the truth.
Actually, one of my brothers and I got
baptized together on the same day.
Oh, that must have been really special for you.
Thank you for sharing that with the Santa.
We'll come back to you.
Let's go over to Adalia now.
Adalia, you were born, raised,
and spent your early teenage years in Brooklyn, New York.
How was that for you growing up around World Headquarters?
It was a beautiful, positive experience.
Getting to see self-sacrificing brothers and sisters
give all they could to Jehovah
and also see how happy and excited they were
in their service was a beautiful example.
This helped instill in me goals and really plant seeds
and put in me the desire to want to live that same kind of life.
We could understand that.
Now, eventually, you and your family moved to Florida.
That's where you met Manny.
You two were eventually married.
You should have stayed in Brooklyn, see?
You met Manny and you two were married.
What next?
So shortly after we got married before our first year anniversary,
we started regular pain hearing.
Then after that, we were invited to serve
with Anita's great in a very rural part of Florida,
kind of the Orange Grove region,
very different to what we both grew up.
We were both used to the city life.
But we went to that area and immersed ourselves
with the congregation, beautiful, young congregation
who worked hard in the ministry.
And we grew to really love those brothers
and Jehovah blessed the hard work
that was being done in that area.
How long were you there?
We were there for 10 years.
And during that time period,
that one congregation that we were at
actually turned into five congregations.
Over to your excellent.
Now Manny, clearly, yourself and Adalia,
you were busy in Jehovah's service.
Was that the end of the extent
of your pursuing theocratic goals?
No, not at all.
Adalia and I made an effort to live a simple life
so that we could give all we could to Jehovah
without any distractions.
That allowed us to pioneer.
It also allowed us to move to that area
where there was greater need.
But to further make ourselves available,
we applied to Bethel several times.
Okay, that's a little nebulous.
Several times.
How many times did you apply to Bethel?
It was only 12 times.
12 times.
What part of know did you not understand?
No, no, please tell us.
What caused you to keep applying
when you weren't receiving a response to come?
As you can see, certainly,
we were very persistent.
We wanted to keep our options open
and allowed Jehovah to decide where we would serve.
But you know, when we looked back at it,
we realized that applying to Bethel all those times
and not getting accepted was just simply
because it wasn't our time.
What do you mean by that?
Was it your time?
There we were in our assignment,
but wanting to be at Bethel.
Jehovah knew we had a lot to learn
and he allowed that assignment
to give us the training that we needed.
And those 12 applications
or those 12 times that we applied taught us a lot,
taught us patience, taught us to wait on Jehovah,
taught us appreciation.
So even though we wanted to make ourselves available
to do more by means of Bethel service,
there was a lot of lessons that we still needed to learn.
We needed to learn to focus, love, and appreciate
the privileges we already had up to that point
in order to be able to fully appreciate
our future Bethel assignment.
And what a blessing it was.
Being with those brothers and sisters for those years
and being able to witness that growth,
it was amazing and we finally look back at it
and certainly our memories that we truly treasure.
Well, those are some valuable lessons that you learned.
We're glad that Jehovah gave you that training.
We're sure it has served you well.
Let's shift over to you now, Marco.
Would you mind telling us a little bit
about your family background?
Sure.
So growing up, I was raised as a Catholic
and I used to go every Sunday to the church.
Yeah.
But then, when I was 17 years old,
my uncle began to study the Bible with Jehovah's Witnesses
and observing the big changes that he made in his life in good
and how happy he became.
Maybe really curious about the Bible.
What's a powerful book?
Now, it is to change life in such a way.
And so I accepted to study the Bible as well.
And when I was 19 years old, I got baptized.
And later on, I started the service as a regular pioneer.
I attended the ministry at Trinity School or the MTS.
And yes, I said, well, do you?
For the last 18 years, I've been serving a Bethel in Rome.
Okay, excellent.
Now, during your time here at Gilead,
it became clear that you have a real love for history, Marco.
Now, we all thought,
was there anything that was part of the Gilead curriculum
that particularly caught your attention?
Yes.
Here at Gilead, we have many artifacts on display.
But there is something in particular that caught my attention.
And I brought it here to show you.
Really?
Yes.
Does the Gilead office know that you have this?
I will bring it back.
Sure.
All right.
Where do we have?
It's a coin.
Okay.
Tell us about it.
This coin is authentic coin,
minted by Emperor Niro in 66th Common Era.
He wanted to celebrate a period of peace.
In fact, if you look carefully on one side,
you can see one door.
Okay, now I can see that.
But can you all see this?
Oh, okay.
Oh, wait a minute.
There it is.
So, this door is the door of an ancient temple in Rome.
And this door was kept closed during the period of peace.
And if a Niro wanted to boast that it was capable to bring peace into the empire.
But there was 66th Common Era.
And the prophecy of Jesus about the destruction of Jerusalem had to be fulfilled.
There it is.
In fact, few months after minting this coin,
Niro was forced to send the military army down to Judea to settle
the Jewish revolt.
We said this gallows.
And these facts we know that led to the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple in 70th Common Era.
So you see, a coin like this can remind us a precious lesson
that Bible prophecies always fulfill,
even though propaganda of this work can say differently.
Nice lesson.
I see that you like this story.
Would you like to know more about Bible history and Rome?
Of course.
I have a short video to watch together.
Let's see it.
Visiting some of the archaeological sites of Italy
can help us to imagine what life was like for the early Christians.
Would you like to come with me for a quick tour?
Let's begin here.
Located about 10 kilometers or 6 miles west of Naples
was the ancient poor city of Putulai.
Today, it is known as Botswali.
In about 59 CE, the Apostle Paul arrived here by boat as a prisoner.
From here, Paul will now begin the long journey to Rome
where he would eventually stand before Caesar himself.
One of the most famous Roman highways is called the Appian Way.
It averages 6 meters or 20 feet in width
and was paved with large lava blocks.
It was on this very road that Paul traveled to the city of Rome.
Along the way, Paul eventually came to a busy 3D center
known as the Marketplace of Apius.
And a leader for the north was a rest area like Anine,
known as the Three Taverns.
Having heard about Paul coming,
Christians from Rome organized a group of brothers
to meet the Apostle aboard of these stops.
Acts 28-15 tells us that,
upon seeing them, Paul thanked God and took courage.
Next, we come to the impressive ruins of Boston, Tika.
This was Rome's most important port.
It is about 25 kilometers or 16 miles southwest of Rome.
We get a glimpse of Roman life back then
with this multi-story apartment buildings known as Insule,
along with temples, theatres, thermal baths, and shops.
Walking through the old streets,
it's easy to imagine our brothers witnessing to the people.
Perhaps they stopped to eat at a food shop similar to this one,
called Thermopolue, where you could buy bread, wine,
roasted meat, cheese, and half-sum refreshment.
Next, we arrive in Rome,
where perhaps the most well-known monument stands.
Yes, you guessed it, the Colosseum.
The Mamoth structure was built in the first century CE,
with a seating capacity estimated to be from 40,000 to 87,000 persons.
This was Rome's entertainment center.
There were mainly two types of games or exhibitions,
combat between two gladiators and the hunting of wild animals.
Criminals were also put to death here.
Interestingly, entry to the Colosseum was free.
This was part of the policy of the Amperors,
who offered free entertainment in order to keep the people under control.
In reality, these spectacles were like a drug that corrupted people's consciences.
Through Christians back then, courageously refused to take any part as spectators.
By the way, do you know where the Romans got the funds to build this huge stadium?
It came from the conquest of Jerusalem in 70 CE.
In fact, there is even an inscription at the Colosseum
that reads,
the Emperor, Titus, Caesar, Vespasian Augustus,
ordered the new amphitheater to be made from the proceeds
from the sale of the booty.
To remember this important event,
Emperor Domitian had a Trojan full arch built in honor of his brother Titus,
who conquered Jerusalem and later became Emperor.
If you look carefully, you can see a bus relift
with a scene of Roman soldiers carrying the spoils from Jerusalem
with a lampstand taken from Jehovah's Temple.
The arch stands today as a clear fulfillment of Jesus' words
about the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple.
So you see, if we use the Bible as a map,
even the stones can be silent witnesses
that the Bible is a book of true history,
true life, and true prophecies.
I hope you enjoy the tour.
Thank you for taking us on that wonderful tour, Marco.
After seeing that video, we all want to go to Italy ourselves.
Don't we see those sights in person?
Be prepared.
So, Manny, let's come back to you now.
What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
You know, I wasn't raised in the truth.
So as a teenager, I was interested in making sure I improved my situation
by means of secular education.
I thought education was the answer.
I thought it was my ticket out.
And boy, did Jehovah fool me?
How so?
Well, secular education wasn't the answer, but education was.
Jehovah knew I needed the very best education, the vine education.
And the truth is that what I've learned from our grand instructor, Jehovah,
surpasses by far anything that the secular education could have provided me.
It really helped me see that, in fact, the education that Jehovah provides us
makes us better people.
So in Gilea's school, I have been able to appreciate how Jehovah has continued to train us
and provide us with something that's helpful not only to myself but to others.
And honestly, I'm really grateful that I've had this opportunity to get better acquainted with my Heavenly Father.
Well stated.
Now tell us, final question to you.
How do you plan on using in your assignment, which you've learned at Gilea?
I would tend to steer or guide myself toward guidelines,
but Gilea has taught me that while guidelines are important,
I can't lose sight of what's more important to Jehovah, and that's people.
Yes.
And Jesus knew that, and He saw that.
Therefore, I want to imitate Jesus in my dealings with people.
When He was on earth, who knew the rules better than Jesus?
Yet what was His focus?
People.
He put people first.
He loved them.
He didn't hold that against them.
In my assignment, I hope to imitate Jesus fully in that I can balance guidelines with principles,
but never losing sight of loving Jehovah's people.
That's beautiful.
Nice lesson learned.
Thank you for sharing that.
In fact, why don't we get an expression from the rest of you on those very same questions?
How about you, Adalia?
What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
To be honest with you, Brother Chilson, I came to Gilea very scared and apprehensive of the unknown.
We understand.
Not knowing what our future assignment might be was very unsettling to me.
But after several lessons, I feel positive and better equipped for what the future holds for us.
We did a deep dive into the sermon on the Mount.
And one particular illustration touched me.
Matthew 7 verse 9 and 10.
Jesus asks which Father, when His Son asks for a fish, would hand Him a serpent.
Now, His listeners understood that a fish could resemble a serpent,
so that the illustration took on a little bit more meaning.
Even though a Son could have been initially deceived if He received a serpent,
a loving Father would never do such a thing.
No.
So I realize that my Heavenly Father, Jehovah, would never give me something bad
and make it appear as something good.
So after meditating on this, I realize that Jehovah will only give me something that will be beneficial for us.
And whatever He asks, it will only be for my eternal happiness.
Ah, that's beautiful.
Yeah, we pray that you have success in that.
In the final question for you, Adalia, how do you hope to use in your assignment what you've learned at Gilea?
I know our brothers and sisters are going through a lot.
I want to be able to help strengthen their faith.
The way mine has been built by sharing with them things that I've learned in school
and also just by living examples, being a living example for them.
And also making sure that they understand whatever challenge or trial that they face,
Jehovah will sustain them.
There's no doubt about it.
So with all that being said, I know that we're ready for whatever the future holds for us.
And the way my faith has been strengthened, it's my treasure, my possession that I'm never going to let go of.
Oh, that's beautiful.
Thank you for sharing with us.
Hanta, let's ask you that question.
What has been the highlight of Gilea training for you?
I've learned many times, I've read in our publications, many times that Jehovah never fails to reward his faithful ones.
But Gilea helped me to understand that more fully.
How do you mean?
Jehovah used Nebuchadnezzar to conquer Tyre.
But Nebuchadnezzar and his men did not get many things, many riches from Tyre.
So it was as if Jehovah told him Nebuchadnezzar,
thank you very much for your labor for me.
Here I give you treasures from Egypt.
Nebuchadnezzar was not his servant, but he rewarded him for the labor he did for him.
So if Jehovah can't do that to someone who is not worshiping him,
how much more so will he reward those who are loyal to him?
Oh, what a beautiful lesson you learned.
Thank you, thank you for sharing that.
And final question to you, Hanta.
How do you plan on using what you've learned in your assignment from what you've gathered here at Gilea?
Yes, when a sister comes to me with her problem,
I quickly think of a solution even when the sister is still speaking.
But Gilea told me to listen, to show empathy.
The person may not need a solution at all.
Maybe what she needs is a listening ear.
But when help is needed, I'm determined to use Bible principle to reason with the person
and allow the person to draw the conclusion.
So I allow the person to draw conclusion, that's all.
We wish you success in that, Hanta.
Thank you so much for sharing that with us.
Now, Simon, let's go over to you.
Okay.
What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
For me, the growing spiritual course lessons have a huge impact.
I even changed my prayer a little bit.
For example, I used to pray to Jehovah,
please help me to show love to my wife and friends and brothers and sisters.
Good prayer.
Yeah.
But it's a little bit vague.
But now I understand what love is specifically.
Love is unselfish cruelty, focusing on doing good to others,
regardless of the merit of the recipient or any benefit I could get back.
So now I know that when I pray to Jehovah to show love,
I am asking for help to be more unselfish person.
Yeah, that's beautiful.
That's a good lesson you've learned.
Now tell us how do you plan on using in your assignment
what you've gathered here at Gilea?
Yeah.
You know, brother Chilton, the Gilea training made me understand
that why I loved computers so much.
Okay.
We have to know more of that.
What do you mean?
Because I can program the computers how they work and they will just work.
But people are not like that.
They are unpredictable.
And they don't always do what I want them to do.
So because of this, when I am focusing on something technical thing,
it is not always easy for me to switch my mind to love people.
So my goal is to love people the way Jehovah loves them.
Remembering they are doing their best as I am.
Good lesson learned.
Thank you for sharing that with us.
Let's talk to your wife now, Yoshi.
What has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
Yeah.
Well, I'm seeing the fruitage of the spirit in a way that I never thought of before.
Can I give you an example?
Please.
Yeah.
So our culture is generally viewed as being humble and polite.
Gilea has taught me that that kind of humility though is not a result of the Holy Spirit
or a fruitage of the Holy Spirit.
Gilea has taught me that humility, love, kindness, all those good qualities.
They have to come from much, much deeper down, not culture or your natural tendency or personality.
It has to be driven by Jehovah, by his Holy Spirit, for it to be a fruitage of the Holy Spirit.
And that understanding of Jehovah helping us in our good points, that just really blew my mind.
Okay.
Nice.
So how do you plan on using in your assignment when you've learned that Gilea at Yoshi?
Yes.
So the Holy Spirit power is very strong.
So my goal is when I get to my new assignment is to be able to expand my comfort zone
by denial with Jehovah's help so that I can be more people oriented.
And I can be comfortable with people and I hope they'll be comfortable with me too.
We have every confidence that they will be.
Well done Yoshi, thank you.
Thank you.
Now finally, Marco, you're our last one here.
So what has been the highlight of your Gilea training?
I think that Gilea helped me to love the Bible even more.
I realized that digging into it, the more I studied the Bible, the more I found new things to learn that I didn't imagine.
And I could compare the Bible now to a suitcase with a double or triple bottom layer and full of things.
And because the more I look into it, the more I can take out more things that maybe I didn't see at the beginning.
So the lesson for me is that when I studied the Bible, I should slow down, take my time to meditate, find a different angle, study all the aspects.
Because nothing in the Bible is random or written by chance.
Nice, nice lesson you've learned there.
And how do you plan on using in your assignment what you've learned?
I think to be aware of how rich is the Bible will help me in any assignment.
I'm more convinced that in any circumstances I will face in the future, new circumstances could be challenging or unexpected.
I think that the only thing I have to do is to go back to the Bible and look for a similar situation
or a lesson or a Bible principle that can apply.
Because I'm sure that Jehovah has a loving Father, has already written in the Bible everything that I need.
Excellent, well done and we'll pray for your success in that too, Marko.
Well, we have thoroughly enjoyed getting to know the six of you better and we appreciate so much you sharing with us your personal expressions.
We echo the words of the Apostle Paul written at 2 Timothy chapter 4 verse 22,
when he said, the Lord, be with the Spirit you show, his undeserved kindness be with you.
It is our prayer that Jehovah's rich blessing continue upon you six and the rest of your Gilead Class 156.
And to all of you in our viewing audience, thank you for joining us.
We look forward to being with you again on the next edition of the Inside Story.
We look forward to hearing from Brother Garrett Loesch today for this principle talk where the Loesch is our longest serving member of the governing body.
In fact, just recently made 30 years serving on the governing body.
So we look forward to his fine talk. I think you'll appreciate the simplicity and power of his theme.
It is trust in Jehovah.
In God we trust. It says on U.S. dollar bills.
However, according to the actual attitude of the people, she did not rather say, in money we trust.
However, trusting in money or riches will lead to disappointment.
Proverbs 11, 28 says, one trusting in riches will fail.
As Jehovah's Witnesses, we say, in Jehovah we trust.
Therefore, we will not fail.
There's many reasons to trust Jehovah.
We are all impressed by Jehovah's works, aren't we?
This includes nature.
And we are impressed when we look at majestic mountains, when we admire the beauty of flowers.
There are so many different flowers in the world.
Which one do you like best?
Man can make artificial flowers, but not real ones that reproduce.
Man can make a beautiful jewelry or other works of art.
However, man cannot produce or make a single stem of grass.
Not to speak of flowers or trees.
Should reflection on this not make us humble?
Man cannot create any living thing.
But Jehovah can and did so.
Jesus commanded, or in connection with Matthew 6, 29.
And he said also, in this verse, take a lesson from the lilies of the field, how they grow.
They do not toil, they do not spin.
But I tell you that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed as one of these.
Yes, Jehovah is the Almighty and he created nature and man.
He did not need to create nature and us in order for him to be happy.
He existed before he started to create for an unknown length of time, as we understand time.
Since when does Jehovah exist?
He always existed.
How can we understand this?
Suppose there was a time when Jehovah did not exist yet.
Then nothing would exist now.
Why? Because nothing can come from nothing.
The fact that we exist is proof that Jehovah always existed.
It's that simple.
Before Jehovah started to create, he existed all alone.
But he did not feel lonely, did he?
He does not depend on others or on things to feel happy.
The Bible says, first Timothy 1, 10, he is the happy God.
Jehovah exists from time indefinite to time indefinite and has complete knowledge of the universal history.
Psalm 90 verse 1 and 2 says, oh Jehovah, from everlasting to everlasting, you are God.
Jehovah created the universe, the earth and man.
He desired to let others share intelligent life and self-awareness out of love.
It's not that he needed other creatures to feel happy.
Or he didn't also need material things to feel happy.
He was happy since past eternity before creation.
How loving that he created mankind so that we can enjoy life and friendship with him.
And what an expression of his all-mightiness, his wisdom and love.
It impresses on our mind and heart how great Jehovah is.
When we encounter challenges in our everyday lives, meditating on Jehovah will help us to endure challenges and difficulties of all sorts.
And to trust him, you soon to be gladiates will find this to be true when you are confronted with problems in the future.
If you experience problems, then what? Pray to Jehovah. His ability to hear prayers is mind-boggling.
Is it not so that when we pray, we have the feeling that Jehovah at that moment has nothing else in mind or to do than just listen to us?
But he can listen to tens of thousands of prayers in hundreds of languages all at the same time.
This includes prayers which are not presented audibly, but silent prayers also spoken in our heart and our mind.
How awesome. This really strengthens our trust and faith in him, doesn't it?
The universe also, that Jehovah created, strengthens our trust in him.
We feel really small and insignificant when we think that the universe got started about as scientists say 18 to 20 billion years ago.
Let us consider a few facts or from connection with the universe that expands, comments that were made about galaxies that move into empty space, empty space where no galaxies or stars yet.
Even with the newest telescopes, scientists have not reached the border of the physical universe, behind which there is nothing, just empty space.
It is mind-boggling to meditate on the universe. Looking at the starry heaven at night, have you ever wondered how far out into space you are actually peering?
Or how many stars you can see with your naked eye? In Psalm 8, verse 3 and 4, David wrote about looking at the stars.
He said, when I see your heavens, the works of your fingers, the moon and the stars that you have prepared, what is mortal man that you keep in mind and the son of man that you take care of him?
It really can make us feel humble to meditate on the universe. How far into the universe could David and also we peer?
At a distance of some 600,000 light years, according to a Watchtower in 1983, it is estimated that our Milky Way alone contains 200 to 400 billion stars.
The stars move with fantastic speed. The Encyclopedia says, quote, the speed of our solar system circulating in our galaxies is about 220 kilometers per second.
And as scientists found out at the speed of 568,000 miles per hour, end of quote.
It is estimated that a light beam takes about 100,000 years from one end of our Milky Way to the other end.
If we look at our Milky Way from outside, our Milky Way and from a different angle, we would see it like a disk.
But we see it as a way, due to the location of our solar system and the outskirts of the Milky Way.
In the book Guide to the Galaxy, published in 1994, it says that it takes the solar system 240 million years to complete the grand circuit around the galaxy.
This speed is an absolute speed, end of quote.
Astronomers estimate that there are approximately 100 billion to one trillion galaxies in the universe.
But how many stars? It is estimated between 10, 6,000,000 and 1,7,000,000, if it means something to you.
You may wonder what is 1,7,000,000? Well, it is, as we can see, illustrated one with 24 zeros.
That is, if you take 1 billion and you multiply that by 1,4,000,000, next picture shows, you get 1,7,000,000.
Can you follow? It is hard for me. The watchtower of March 1, 1991 raised the question,
quote, where is the source of all the energy represented by the 100,000 million stars in our galaxy, and it is just one galaxy,
as well as the more than 1,000 million galaxies that make up the visible universe, the quote from 1991, watchtower March 1.
The Bible encourages us to meditate on the universe. It strengthens our trust into hover.
The Bible says, raise your eyes high up and see, who has created these things?
It is the one who is bringing forth the army of them even by number, all of whom he calls even by name.
Due to the abundance of dynamic energy, he also being vigorous in power, not one of them is missing.
Well, who is that one? Of course, Jehovah.
Why is it good to talk about the universe since it is so hard to fathom its size?
The universe proves that Jehovah is Almighty, and this inspires us to trust in his prophecies about putting an end to wickedness,
putting an end to the devil, and creating a paradise on earth for all obedient mankind.
It is good to reflect on what David wrote about Jehovah in Psalm 139.
In verses 1 to 5, David is confident of Jehovah's interest in him.
Jehovah wants but to hear from us. We can share our innermost thoughts.
We can tell Jehovah anything without being embarrassed.
So let's look at the scripture, Psalm 139 from verse 1.
Oh, Jehovah, you have searched through me and you know me. You know when I sit down and when I rise up,
you discern my thoughts from afar. You observe me when I travel and when I lay down.
You are familiar with all my ways. There's not a word on my tongue, but look, Jehovah, you already know it well.
Behind and before me, you surround me and you lay your hand upon me.
So that's a very impressive text, isn't it?
In verses 6 to 13, David tried to comprehend Jehovah's greatness.
It was too much for him, and so in verse 6, he goes on to say,
knowledge is beyond my comprehension. It is too high for me to reach.
Where can I escape from your spirit and where can I run away from your face?
If I were to ascend to heaven, you would be there.
And if I were to make my bed in the grave, look, you would be there.
If I would fly away with the wings of the dawn to reside by the most remote sea,
even there, your hand would lead me and your right hand would take hold of me.
If I say, surely darkness will conceal me, then the night around me would become light.
Even the darkness would not be too dark for you, but night would be as bright as the day.
Darkness is the same as light for you.
For you produced my kidneys, you kept me screened off in my mother's womb.
David is amazed at Jehovah's wisdom in creating a human body.
He gives all credit to Jehovah for his extraordinary gift.
Verse 14 continues to say,
I praise you, because in an awe-inspiring way, I am wonderfully made.
Your works are wonderful, and I know this very well.
My bones were not hidden from you when I was made in secret,
when I was woven in the depth of the earth, figuratively.
Your eyes even saw me as an embryo.
All its parts were written in your book, regarding the days when they were formed,
before any of them existed.
So let's read two more verses and see the effect it had on David
and his complete trust and confidence in his Heavenly Father, verse 17.
So to me, how precious your thoughts are, O God, how vast is the sum of them?
If I try to count them, they outnumber the grains of sand.
When I awake, I am still with you.
So we agree with David that we are created in a wonderful way, very impressive.
Well, think of as an example of our ability to use language and thought.
We are also unique in our profound curiosity about ourselves, aren't we?
Different from all animals, we are unique in our ability to contemplate God's thoughts.
This is one way we are made in God's image.
Think of our eyes, a marvel, we have binocular vision, able to distinguish the relationship between different objects.
Think of our ears, a marvel, we hear in stereo.
Now let's talk about the universe in our brain.
The book, the physics fact book, edited by Glenn Ellert says in the quote,
weighing around three pounds, the brain contains nearly 100 billion neurons.
What's that, nerve cells?
100 billion neurons.
If you don't believe them, you can verify count yourself here.
The brain is the most complicated organ in the universe.
One reference works as about these nerve cells that are as many as the stars in the Milky Way galaxy.
It also has trillions of supportive cells called glia.
Each neuron is connected to other neurons by as many as 40,000 individual connections called synapses between the cells.
The brain has more connections than there are stars in the universe, end of quote.
The question, we are wonderfully made, and all the praise belongs to Jehovah.
Being aware that Jehovah created this fantastic universe, the earth and man,
does this not help us to become more confident in our trust in Jehovah,
to be able and willing to help us when we face problems or challenges?
Should we face persecution or abandon on our work, then what?
Trust in Jehovah.
But Jehovah is not only all-powerful.
He is also love, personified.
Jehovah is very interested in you soon to be Gilead graduates.
Yes, he is interested in all of us.
He loves us.
He gave his beloved son Jesus Christ as a sacrifice for our sins,
and for the purpose of helping us to become perfect and enjoy everlasting friendship with him.
Jehovah had full trust and confidence in his son's faithfulness.
His love moves us to love.
Love is the perfect bond of union, says Colossians 3.14.
Yes, it is the most powerful bond in the universe.
Perfect love bonding the son and the father together unbreakably.
For like reasons God trusts His organizational servants,
knowing that love would hold most of them immovably under test.
Some 56 verse 11 says,
In God we have put out trust.
Some 3 verse 5 encourages us.
Trust in Jehovah with all your heart.
Jesus is our best example.
When he was nailed to the torture stake, his enemies mockingly said,
He has put his trust in God.
Let him now rescue him if he wants him for he said, I'm God's son.
On the other hand, Jehovah trusts us as well.
How encouraging.
He trusts his organization of servants, knowing that love would hold most of them or most of us immovably to him.
Immovably under test.
And that his organization of creatures would never stop doing so.
He trusted Abraham. He trusted other patriarchs.
He trusts the anointed ones today.
He trusts the members of the great crowd with an earthly hope.
Yes, Jehovah trusts you.
And we trust that you all will continue to trust Jehovah forever.
Yes, in God we trust.
Now we come to our presentation of the diplomas.
And so for this, I will be assisted by Brother Melanfant,
a teaching, a helper to the teaching committee.
So appreciate your help.
Young man.
Yes, thank you.
First of all, we have Brother and Sister Achonu.
They will return to the Britain branch.
Brother and Sister Alvarez will return to the Dominican Republic branch.
Brother and Sister Beko will return to the Poland branch.
Brother Kaeproni has been assigned to the United States branch.
Brother and Sister Dumitran will return to the France branch.
Brother and Sister Gonzales have been assigned to the Columbia branch.
Brother and Sister Hatens have been assigned to the Congo King's Shasha branch.
Brother and Sister Hori will return to the Japan branch.
Brother Kutsishvili has been assigned to the Greece branch.
Brother Kochianchiich will return to the Croatia branch.
And Sister Koleva will return to the Bulgaria branch.
Brother and Sister Koto Isuva will return to the Fiji branch.
Brother and Sister Lucas have been assigned to the Greece branch.
Brother and Sister Luna have been assigned to the South Africa branch.
Brother Marken will return to the Canada branch.
Brother and Sister Master will return to the Netherlands branch.
Brother and Sister Makowski have been assigned to the Bulgaria branch.
Brother and Sister Orton have been assigned to the Mozambique branch.
Brother Raunig will return to the Central Europe branch.
Sister Reza Fimandim will return to the Madagascar branch.
Brother Rivera will return to the Columbia branch.
And Brother and Sister Cideris will return to the Canada branch.
Brother and Sister Toledo will return to the United States branch.
Brother and Sister Volkman will return to the Serbia branch.
Brother and Sister Walker have been assigned to the Brazil branch.
Brother and Sister Wechakshana will return to the Indonesia branch.
I think Brother Malen font did a fantastic job.
But now it's my pleasure to present to you the graduates of the 156th class of Gillian.
Well, the class has written a letter that they would like to read.
And so for the Lewis Walker from the United States, we'll read that for us now.
To the governing body and Bethel family.
After five months of intense Bible study,
we are filled with so many emotions
that is hard to find the words to express our appreciation and gratitude.
We feel like Isaiah when he saw a vision of Jehovah's described in Isaiah chapter six.
He saw Jehovah in a way he never had before.
And the same is true of us.
Gillian has helped us to more deeply appreciate Jehovah's beautiful personality,
his matchless wisdom and his unfailing love.
Like Isaiah at times, we felt overwhelmed with our imperfections and limitations.
However, just as Jehovah reassured Isaiah through a Seraph,
Jehovah lovingly encouraged us during the past 20 weeks,
we were cared for as a nursing mother tenderly cares for own children.
Our structures became beloved to us as they shared not only their knowledge
and understanding of God's word, but their very selves.
We were encouraged to always give Jehovah our best to lower ourselves and to lift others up.
We learned the value of not taking ourselves too seriously and to cherish our journey with Jehovah.
We also deeply appreciate our dear governing body.
Despite your very busy schedules, you may time for us,
your heartfelt lectures motivated us to be courageous
and to not fear the challenges we will face.
We will never forget your example of kindness, humility, and love.
And imitating your faith, we are determined to remain loyal and submissive to Jehovah
in his organization as we go out to our assignments.
Finally, our education went beyond the Gilea classroom.
We saw hospitality defined by you dear brothers and sisters of the United States Bethel family.
Your kindness and generosity were outstanding.
We were simply basking in your love.
And although we did not have the enough time to get to know each one of you,
it was enough time to fall in love with you.
We would never be able to thank our Heavenly Father enough for this unique experience.
We now echo the words of Isaiah who declared even before receiving details of his new assignment.
Here I am, send me, send me.
As we depart for our respective assignments, we are confident thanks to this beautiful training
that Jehovah will make us firm and he will make us strong.
With heart's full of gratitude and love, your brothers, the 156 class of Gilea.
We thank you for those sentiments.
It truly does reflect the appreciation and spirituality of the entire class.
So we appreciate that very much and what a pleasure to be with you today.
Well, in our opening comments, we talked a bit about the privilege of being ones that Jehovah would use.
And remember, we reviewed examples from Luke 1 and 2 of humble, obedient ones
that Jehovah appreciated like Mary and the humble shepherds, Simeon and Anna.
And the encouragement was imitate those fine examples and be the kind of people that Jehovah is pleased to use
by cultivating what matters most to Jehovah.
And that is spiritual qualities that he holds dear and that makes us useful to him.
But the fact is, you are ones that Jehovah is pleased to use.
In fact, all of Jehovah's people, all in the listening audience, all of Jehovah's people, the world over,
Jehovah is pleased to use them because he is drawn each one.
We know that, don't we? John 644 tells us, what does the verse say?
That no man can come to me unless the father who sent me draws him and I will resurrect him in the last days.
So Jehovah has drawn each one of us because he saw something in our hearts of value.
He saw a humility and honesty and a desire to learn the truth and to serve the true and living God.
And so we have the privilege then of being a part of Jehovah's name people.
As individuals, we have the privilege of having a place in his great spiritual temple arrangement.
We are all on Jehovah's team.
And the privilege that every one of us has, of course, is to bear his name in the kingdom preaching work.
But at times, Jehovah also gives us other work to do and other assignments that are related to the kingdom preaching work.
And for you, dear friends, that included providing this training in Gilead.
And while this Gilead training doesn't place you above your brothers and you certainly do not feel that way,
it does indicate to Jehovah's approval of you and the fact that he saw something good in your hearts
that he could then continue to mold and train so that he could use you to further help and strengthen his people.
And quite likely it's some of the same things that he saw in Mary and the shepherds in Simeon and Anna.
Humility, deep spirituality, obedience, loyalty,
appreciation for spiritual things and constancy in your theocratic routine.
Be assured that Jehovah loves you and that he approves of you for these valuable qualities that really make you useful to him.
And so our concluding encouragement is keep being the kind of people that Jehovah can use.
Really, that's at the heart of the encouragement in Philippians 316.
At any rate to the extent we have made progress, let us go on walking orderly in the same routine.
And we think back to our examples from Luke 1 and 2.
And we don't hear again about Simeon and Anna, although we are sure that they remain faithful for the rest of their lives.
But we do follow Mary as she continued in her service to Jehovah and the years go by as she raised Jesus,
along with Joseph and her other children who loved and served Jehovah.
We watched as Mary appreciatively preserved these things in her heart that Jehovah was doing in connection with her son and his son, of course, Jehovah.
And we also follow Mary as she possibly dealt with the death of her husband at some point along the way.
And as she dealt with the initial lack of faith of her other children in Jesus Messiah's ship.
And then finally, as she watched her son die in a most shameful and painful way on that torture state,
when Simeon's words came true that a long sword would be run through her.
Jehovah's confidence in Mary was well placed.
She continued to be the kind of person that he could use.
And so follow her good example by being one that Jehovah can continue to use,
by focusing on what matters most to Jehovah.
Keep cultivating the qualities that will endear you to Jehovah.
And then whatever work needs to be done, whatever assignment needs to be filled,
whatever encouragement needs to be given.
Well, then you will be spiritually qualified and you will be ready to be used by Jehovah if that is his desire.
As continue to be one that Jehovah would use in his service.
And then you will always have his favor and you will have joy and contentment in whatever Jehovah has in mind for you to do.
We hope you enjoyed this portion of the graduation.
Be on the lookout for the rest of the program as it's released on JW.org during this month.
To conclude, our postcard takes us to the southern tip of Africa.
Welcome to Eswatini.
This tiny landlocked country, once known as Swaziland, sits between Mozambique and South Africa.
You can find magnificent wildlife in Shalane National Park.
Or stand in amazement beside Cebebe Rock.
One of the world's largest granite domes.
Tradition has an important place in Eswatini culture.
How men or women tie Leah fabric over their shoulders communicates whether they are married or single.
The country also has kept the tradition of an absolute monarchy.
King Subuza, the second, rained for 82 years until his death in 1982 and had quite the rapport with Jehovah's Witnesses.
In 1933, the king was delighted with the message carried by pioneers and called his personal bodyguard of 100 warriors to listen as well.
On another occasion, he offered to buy the loudspeaker and the records our brothers were using.
They humbly explained,
It all belongs to another king.
Subuza wanted to know who this was.
He is Jesus Christ.
Subuza replied,
Oh, he is a great king.
I don't want to take anything that belongs to him.
Our brothers continue loyally announcing God's kingdom.
Currently, there are over 3,000 publishers conducting over 4,000 Bible studies.
The country also hosts refugees from Burundi, Rwanda, Uganda, and various other countries.
And publishers go to the camp to preach extending a warm welcome and a message of hope.
You can feel the love our brothers in the Nunguyoyo congregation have for neighbor and each other.
They wish to send that love to you.
The World Wide Brotherhood.
From the world headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses, this is JW Broadcasting.